Style Guide and Diataxis Review: Identity II (#793)
iotaledger/identity.rs: documentation/docs/decentralized_identifiers/overview.md

- Decentralized Identifiers
- overview
- DLT
- tutorial
---

# Decentralized Identifiers (DID)

The Decentralized Identifiers (DID) standard from the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) is the fundamental standard that supports the concept of a decentralized digital identity. A DID is a unique identifier that contains information that can be resolved to a DID Document. This document contains data such as public keys, enabling the holder to prove ownership over their personal data, but also URIs that link to public information about the identity. This implementation complies with the [DID specifications v1.0 Working](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core//).

> In the IOTA Identity framework, we have implemented the DID standard according to the `iota` [DID Method Specification](../specs/did/iota_did_method_spec.md). We recommend reading the `iota` DID Method Specification as the golden standard for DID on IOTA. Other implementations of DID on IOTA also follow the `iota` DID Method Specification when applicable. However, it is not necessary to implement a novel Method implementation for every project, so feel free to utilize this framework directly. 

Reviewer: Tbh I have a problem to understand what it is supposed to mean. Does it mean that if I implement my own DID I should follow the `iota` DID Method Specification? Or does it mean that there are other implementations and they are most likely follow this specification, but might not?

Author: Yes to the first question and yes to the second; the "where applicable" is supposed to say, "Yes, the DID Method is used for a lot of implementations" but some may have something more "technical" or process driven that don't allow them to adopt it. If that makes sense.

Does the original work better for you, as a person going in this relatively "blind"?

Reviewer 2: We position the `iota` DID method indeed as the one method to rule them all inside the IOTA ecosystem. But we can't force it. So people are allowed to use their own. Overall, we just advice to use the framework and don't bother thinking about the method and implementing it yourself as we have done that in a really good way ;) I hope that might help clarify.

> In the IOTA Identity framework, we have implemented the DID standard according to the `iota` [DID Method Specification](../specs/did/iota_did_method_spec.md). We recommend reading the `iota` DID Method Specification as the golden standard for DID on IOTA. Other implementations of DID on IOTA also follow the `iota` DID Method Specification when applicable. However, it is not necessary to implement a novel Method implementation for every project, so feel free to utilize this framework directly. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the IOTA Identity framework, we have implemented the DID standard according to the `iota` [DID Method Specification](../specs/did/iota_did_method_spec.md). We recommend reading the `iota` DID Method Specification as the golden standard for DID on IOTA. Other implementations of DID on IOTA should follow the `iota` DID Method Specification when applicable. However, it is not necessary to implement a novel Method implementation for every project, so feel free to utilize this framework directly. 
```

Then this one should do the trick.

Author: 👍

Here is an example of a DID conforming to the `iota` method specification:
`did:iota:8dQAzVbbf6FLW9ckwyCBnKmcMGcUV9LYJoXtgQkHcNQy`

## Chapter Overview

In this chapter, we will explain the basic aspects of the DID standard. We will explore the how and why of DID Documents and why IOTA is a suitable technology to host the DID Documents and the rest of a Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) Framework.

## Decentralized Identifiers

A Decentralized Identifier, or DID, is a unique identifier that is tied to a subject. This subject can be anything: a person, an organization, an IoT device, or even an object. The identifier can be used by the subject to identify themselves through a digital format, providing a basis for online identification. The identifier looks like a set of random characters that includes some prefixes to determine which standard and implementation is used:

`did:iota:8dQAzVbbf6FLW9ckwyCBnKmcMGcUV9LYJoXtgQkHcNQy`

> W3C is a well-known standardization body that has defined how DIDs should look and work. This provides a basis for different technologies that implement the DID standard to achieve interoperability. A full list of all implementations can be found [here.](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-spec-registries/#did-methods) Please keep in mind that, unfortunately, most of these methods are outdated and not maintained.

Author: Ah, it was spelled out in the first sentence of the intro so I took it out since it wasn't a reference that was too far away. Throwing in the link and updating the "here".

## DID Documents

The purpose of a DID is to help navigate to a DID Document, which is a document containing more information regarding the identity subject. This document contains data, such as public keys, enabling the subject to prove ownership over their personal data, but also URIs that link to public information about the identity.

The identifier contains all information to resolve a DID, providing the latest DID Document. The first three characters `did` indicate that the DID standard from W3C must be used to resolve the identifier. It is followed by a unique method name, in our case `iota`, to indicate that the IOTA method is used. The IOTA method is a specific implementation that follows the following [method spec](../specs/did/iota_did_method_spec.md). This provides unique rules for the protocol to follow to result in the latest DID Document. In our case, it describes how DID Documents are uploaded and queried to and from the IOTA Tangle. Lastly, a DID contains a set of random characters that are unique per identity, making the identity unique and ensuring every identity resolves to a unique DID Document. 

:::note Requires basic knowledge of Asymmetric Encryption

> The following and later sections require some basic knowledge of Asymmetric Encryption. Please read or view some materials on the subject before continuing.

Reviewer 2: We decided against that. People can easily find some resources themselves. But if you find one that you guys consider very helpful, it would be great.

> The following and later sections require some basic knowledge of Asymmetric Encryption. Please read or view some materials on the subject before continuing.

Reviewer: I'd still alter or remove the second sentence. As is, it is a quite vague call to action ("go read something somewhere idk"), and also in the current phrasing it implies that the reader doesn't know basics of asymmetric encryption.

Also asymmetric encryption is just a term so it shouldn't be capitalized.

:::

> A DID Document contains at least two important pieces of data: public keys and services. The public keys can be used to prove ownership over the identity, by cryptographically signing something with the associated private key. The public key can be used to verify that the identity subject signed the data and therefore controls the private key. Ownership over the private keys, therefore, proves ownership over the identity. This also means that it is very important to keep the private keys safe and secure. Additionally, the public keys allow users to send encrypted data to the identity, using their public key, that only the identity owner can decrypt.

Reviewer: From here and on: I don't think that changing a phrase to an adverb is a good change in general.

Author: Hm. @lucas-tortora , tie breaker.

Reviewer 3: I'd go with adverbs, but I don't think it makes much of a difference one way or the other.

## Why Use DIDs?

DIDs allow any subject to have a unique identifier, that they can prove ownership of and, at the same time, provide a way to send them encrypted messages. The Identity is Self-Sovereign, meaning the subject is in control of when the identity is created but also destroyed.

DIDs become more interesting in combination with Verifiable Credentials, which will be covered in a later section. Essentially, Verifiable Credentials (VCs) are signed statements by trusted third parties about a certain identity. The signer, or Issuer, is referenced by the DID and so is the subject, often called the Holder. The Holder controls a copy of this statement and share it with other parties, the Verifiers, that can verify the statement and check which party made the statement, without having to ask the Issuer. Instead, they can verify the signature of the Issuer by checking the Issuers DID Document. This whole setup puts Holders back in control over their own data, but also makes the data much more trustworthy as it has become verifiable.

## Why Use IOTA Identity Over Other Implementations?

> IOTA Identity is a framework to implement SSI on IOTA. Inherently, IOTA provides unique features that have a major impact on the usability of the framework.

Reviewer 3: Since every page can be page one, in theory, if it's the first time we introduce a term, an acronym may not be clear to the user.
```suggestion
IOTA Identity is a framework to implement Self-Sovereign Identities (SSI) on IOTA. Inherently, IOTA provides unique features that have a major impact on the framework's usability.
```

### Feeless

> IOTA is a feeless Distributed Ledger Technology, which means that messages can immutably be stored inside the Tangle at no cost, nor a requirement of holding any cryptocurrency tokens. That means that SSI applications can directly deploy towards the main network without any problems, as compared to most other SSI solutions running on a test network or having cryptocurrency requirements. So not only does it give IOTA Identity predictable costs, but it also turns it into a fair network.

Reviewer 3: I feel like we're losing a bit of the explanation here.

Author: Reversed

> IOTA is a feeless Distributed Ledger Technology, which means that messages can immutably be stored inside the Tangle at no cost, nor a requirement of holding any cryptocurrency tokens. That means that SSI applications can directly deploy towards the main network without any problems, as compared to most other SSI solutions running on a test network or having cryptocurrency requirements. This does not simply make IOTA Identity have predictable costs and prevent issues around cryptocurrency holding taxes and legislation, it also makes it a fair network as anyone would be able to create one or more identities at no cost. The wealth of someone is irrelevant, making it the most inclusive SSI solution.

Reviewer: "Not only it gives IOTA Identity predictable costs, but also turns it into a fair network"?

Author: Works for me👌

### Ease-of-Use

> Without the need for a token, IOTA Identity can directly be used on the main network without having to purchase and manage a cryptocurrency token. Additionally, the framework provides easy-to-use APIs that allow both standardized behavior or a flexible one, but with more complex access. Lastly, IOTA Identity provides a [Stronghold](https://wiki.iota.org/stronghold.rs/welcome/ "Stronghold is an open-source software library that was originally built to protect IOTA Seeds, but can be used to protect any digital secret.") solution for managing secrets securely, without requiring developers to reinvent the security wheel.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Without the need for a token, you can directly use IOTA Identity on the main network without having to purchase and manage a cryptocurrency token. Additionally, the framework provides easy-to-use APIs that allow both standardized behavior and a flexible one with more complex access. Lastly, IOTA Identity provides a [Stronghold](https://wiki.iota.org/stronghold.rs/welcome/). Stronghold is an open-source software library that was originally built to protect IOTA Seeds but can be used to protect any digital secret. It is a solution for managing secrets securely, without requiring developers to reinvent the security wheel.
```
